Introduction to User Account Control (UAC)
User Account Control (UAC) is
an access control system
that forces applications and tasks
to run in the context of a
non-administrative account until an
administrator authorizes elevated access.
In general, the effect of UAC is that any
application that wishes to perform
an operation with a potential
system-wide impact,
cannot do so without the
user’s consent, at least in theory.
It is also important to point out
that UAC has two different modes:
credential prompt and consent prompt.
When a standard user wishes to
perform an administrative task
such as installing a new application,
the user will be prompted to enter
the credentials of an administrator
in order to complete the task.
However, when an administrative
user attempts to do the same,
he or she is presented
with a consent prompt
and the user simply has to confirm
that the task should be completed.
In this case, no re-entry of
credentials is required.
Even while logged in as an
administrative user,
the account will have
two security tokens,
one running at a medium integrity level
and the other at high integrity level.
UAC acts as the separation mechanism
between those two integrity levels.
To see integrity levels in action, let’s
first login as the admin user,
open a command prompt,
and run the whoami /groups command.
This command prompt is currently running
at a Medium integrity level.
Let’s attempt to change the
password for the admin user:
The request is denied because to
change the admin user’s password,
we must switch to a
high integrity level
even if we are logged in as
an administrative user.
One way to do this is through
powershell.exe
with the Start-Process cmdlet,
and specifying the “Run as
administrator” option.
After pressing enter and
accepting the UAC prompt,
we are presented with a new
high integrity cmd.exe process.
Let’s check our integrity level using
the whoami command again.
We are running at a
high integrity level
so let’s attempt to change
the password again:
This time, the password
change is successful.